In systemd, the system logs can be examined with the “journalctl”
command. Instead of trying to remember which syslog log file will
likely contain the messages you are after (auth.log? daemon.log?), you
just have to figure out the match criteria for the messages you want
to see, such as the “unit name” for the relevant service.

The basic command for displaying the names of logfile fields is

    journalctl -N

or, to see them in a nicer order,

    journalctl -N | sort

(Unfortunately, this option might not be available in older versions
of systemd.)

One useful field name is “_SYSTEMD_UNIT”, the value of which identifies
the particular service. To see all values for this field that occur
in the logs, use

    journalctl -F _SYSTEMD_UNIT

or, sorting as before

    journalctl -F _SYSTEMD_UNIT | sort

Previously, to look for messages (on Debian, at least) to do with mail
delivery, you would look in /var/log/mail.log. With systemd, instead,
you have to remember the service name for the specific MTA you have
installed (or recognize it from the above “journalctl -F” listing).
For example, if you are running Postfix, then the messages from this
can be seen with

    journalctl _SYSTEMD_UNIT=postfix@-.service

(Yes, you have to remember to type that “@-” part.)

On current versions of Debian, both syslog and systemd logging
continue to be enabled simultaneously, so you can continue to use old
syslog-specific techniques for examining log messages. In fact, the
systemd journal is set by default to only be saved to a RAM disk, not
persistent storage--only the syslog logs are saved persistently. This
can be easily changed, of course.

One nice improvement in journald over syslog is that timestamps are
now recorded in UTC, rather than local time. This means you can
display the log message timestamps in whatever local timezone you
wish. It always seemed a bit of an anachronism that there is (nearly)
no concept of a “system timezone” in Linux (and nor should there be),
except for odd exceptions like syslog.
